# Understanding Services in CODE Framework

One of the main features areas of CODE Framework is creating business logic and middle tiers as SOA services. SOA is the cornerstone of many modern applications, creating systems that are more maintainable, flexible, and suitable for a wide range of scenarios, ranging from Windows to Web and Mobile scenarios using a wide variety of technologies, and outperforming conventional multi-tiered applications in a range of metrics. Using CODE Framework, it also becomes easy and extremely productive to build SOA layers.

In today’s application landscape, there only seems to be one aspect that is certain: Uncertainty. Which UI technology or which mobile platform will be dominant in the years to come? We know that for business applications especially, rich Windows UIs are still very popular and the most productive type of application. We also have no doubt about the significance of Web applications in general, and HTML5 in particular. We know that iOS and Android are important mobile operating systems, and we hope Windows Phone will catch up. There also is a good chance that Windows 8 Metro will have a significant role to play. But do we know any of these for sure? And how many of these does any system have to support now or in the future? Even if you know that you want to build your application based on HTML5, which is going to be the predominant tool for building such applications a few years down the road? Or which approach to building Windows 8 Metro applications will be the one you choose?

In short: It is currently impossible to answer many of these questions now, and it’s certainly impossible to answer these questions if you are aiming for a 5- or 10- or even 20-year horizon. 20 years may seem like an extremely long time in IT, but realistically speaking, databases that have been maintained for 10 or 20 years, or business logic that has its roots in VB6 is not uncommon. In fact, one of the most common operating systems in use today (Windows XP) is now more than a decade old. Although UI choices and platforms (such as phones and slates) have changed very rapidly and will likely continue to do so, middle-tiers and databases have evolved at a much slower pace. Consider CODE Magazine as an example. The subscriber system we are using for the magazine has continually evolved over the years, but many of its components are now over a dozen years old and that is perfectly fine.

> "Basing your systems on SOA and Services is the best way to deal with the uncertainties of today’s development landscape, build systems that will be maintainable for a long time, and adjust flexibly to new demands."

So how do you work productively as a developer or architect in such an environment? How can you build middle tiers, business logic, and databases in a way that will live up to the standards you set in the last decade or two, not to mention expectations in the future? How can we fulfill the expectations of a technical and economic environment where it is not acceptable to have to throw out the entire application to support the latest mobile device or browser? And how do we fulfill those expectations in a way that’s a realistically feasible approach, highly productive, creates highly flexible and exquisitely architected systems that are easy to maintain without a large squad of rocket-science-level developers, and generally promotes high quality as a goal that is easy to achieve?

## Services are the Answer

I believe very strongly that Services and SOA (Service Oriented Architecture) are a very good answer to this problem. And by that, I do not mean the creation of XML Web Services or the creation of REST Services or any similar technology you might choose. Instead, I am talking about creating services that are more abstract and broken out as generically callable objects with an agreed-upon interface (“contracts”). Once such abstract services are created, various deployment choices can be made.

Do you feel that REST is the ideal way to get to those services? Fine choice! You like XML Web Services, and SOAP better? That’s fine with me too. You prefer binary optimized services for efficiency? In scenarios where binary optimized services are technically possible, they might be the best choice of all. But these are decisions that are made later. Start out with a REST Service and you might be stuck with REST forever. The same is true for many systems that are based solely on SOAP. But if you start out generic, you have great freedom in choice. Perhaps you use TCP/IP-based services initially, but then decide you want to write an iOS or Android client, and REST is the better choice for that. With solid architecture, that is simply a deployment choice.

None of these aspects are new. SOA has been around for a while and different types of service standards as well. But how do you really approach a project that utilizes SOA and do so in a way that is highly productive yet at the same easy to do, even for junior developers? And how do you really call services using all these different standards?

If you have done service work in the past, you know that a lot of this theory is not necessarily the way things work in the real world. Lots of services are stuck in SOAP. Lots of services are REST-based and cannot adjust to other standards. In fact, many environments are specifically geared towards the creation of specific types of services but can’t easily cross over to other standards. If you are using WCF in .NET, you are in a pretty good position, as WCF is highly flexible; even so, services created for SOAP do not easily translate to REST and vice-versa.

## CODE Framework SOA Features

And this is where CODE Framework’s SOA features enter the picture. CODE Framework is a free and open source framework provided by the makers of CODE Magazine. It has grown out of a larger commercial product, enhanced with new features, and it is available on CodePlex (http://codeframework.codeplex.com). For specifics as to how to get and install it, see the sidebar. The range of features includes anything from data access to front ends of various kinds (WPF, Web, Mobile, etc.). For a taste of CODE Framework’s WPF features, see the article in the Jan/Feb 2012 issue of CODE Magazine. This time however, we are going to take a look at features in the Services and SOA sub-sections of the framework.

The particular goals of the CODE Framework SOA features (which are all based on WCF) include the creation of contracts and services in a highly productive way, enable hosting of those services in ways that are convenient for both development and runtime deployment, and enable seamless swapping beyond various standards and protocols to support any conceivable caller and scenario without the need for any rewrites. In addition, CODE Framework provides tools and templates to make this easy and more productive than creating old-fashioned business layers in conventional multi-tiered scenarios.

To start exploring the CODE Framework SOA features, we will create a new service contract definition as well as an implementation. The example will closely match the features used by the WPF client application I described in last month’s CODE Framework article, which used hardcoded dummy data. If you were so inclined, you could use the example created in this article and call the services from that WPF client to create a more complete application. However, to keep things simple, the downloadable sample accompanying this article will be stand-alone.

To follow this example, you need the CODE Framework on your computer, or at the very least the CODE Framework Tools (which will automatically retrieve all needed components from CodePlex, in case you are missing any, which makes this a convenient option). You can install the tools through the Visual Studio Extension Manager (found in the Tools menu) by searching for “CODE Framework” on the Online Gallery (scroll down a bit if you don’t see it right away). Figure 1 shows the Extension Manager in action. Once installed, the CODE Framework Tools provide CODE Framework project and item templates as well as other useful tools.
